# VSCode Extensions

## Usefull VSCode Extensions

- Auto Close Tag
  - Automatically add HTML/XML close tag, same as Visual Studio IDE or Sublime Text
- Auto Rename Tag
  - Auto rename paired HTML/XML tag
- Bookmarks ( <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>F2</kbd> & <kbd>F2</kbd> )
  - It helps you to navigate in your code, moving between important positions easily and quickly.
- Code Runner
  - Run code snippet or code file for multiple languages.
- Community Material Theme
  - Manage pull requests and conduct code reviews in your IDE with full source-tree context. Comment on any line, not just the diffs. Use jump-to-definition, your favorite keybindings, and code intelligence with more of your workflow.
- GistPad
  - GistPad is a Visual Studio Code extension that allows you to edit GitHub Gists and repositories from the comfort of your favorite editor.
- Git File History
  - Git File History is a modern, fast and intuitive tool for browsing the history and files in any git repository.
- Github Pull Requests and Issues
  - This extension allows you to review and manage GitHub pull requests and issues in Visual Studio Code.
- indent-rainbow
  - This extension colorizes the indentation in front of your text, alternating four different colors on each step. Some may find it helpful in writing code for Python, Nim, Yaml, and probably even filetypes that are not indentation dependent.
- Inline fold
  - VSCode Inline Fold extension mimics VSCode's folding experience for inline code.
- Linter
  - Extension for code linting, all in one package. New linters can be easily added through an extension framework.
- Live Server
  - Automatically reloads webpage when you save the code.
- Markdown Preview Enhanced
  - Markdown Preview Enhanced is an extension that provides you with many useful functionalities such as automatic scroll sync, math typesetting, mermaid, PlantUML, pandoc, PDF export, code chunk, presentation writer, etc.
- Material Icon Theme
  - This extension enables you to change the color, theme, and etc. of the default folder icon using the command palette or via user settings.
- Peacock
  - Subtly change the color of your Visual Studio Code workspace. Ideal when you have multiple VSCode instances, use VS Live Share, or use VSCode's Remote features, and you want to quickly identify your editor.
- PHP Debug
  - This extension is a debug adapter between VSCode and Xdebug by Derick Rethans. Xdebug is a PHP extension (a .so file on Linux and a .dll on Windows) that needs to be installed on your server.
- PHP IntelliSense
  - It is an advanced autocompletion and refactoring support for PHP.
- PHP Snippets
  - This extension contains code snippets for PHP and other frameworks to help you to type faster.
- Prettier-Code formatter
  - Prettier is an opinionated code formatter. It enforces a consistent style by parsing your code and re-printing it with its own rules that take the maximum line length into account, wrapping code when necessary.
- Project Manager
  - It helps you to easily access your projects, no matter where they are located. Don't miss those important projects anymore.
- Rainbow CSV
  - It makes your codes, writings, files, and etc. more readable with making them colorful.
- vscode-pdf
  - Helps you to display pdf in VSCode.
- Vue Language Features (Volar)
  - Vue Language Features is a language support extension built for Vue, Vitepress and petite-vue. This is based on @vue/reactivity to calculate everything on-demand, to implement native TypeScript language service level performance.
- WakaTime
  - WakaTime is an open source VSCode plugin for metrics, insights, and time tracking automatically generated from your programming activity.
- TODO Highlight
  - Highlight TODO, FIXME and other annotations within your code.Sometimes you forget to review the TODOs you've added while coding before you publish the code to production. So I've been wanting an extension for a long time that highlights them and reminds me that there are notes or things not done yet. Hope this extension helps you as well.
- Todo Tree
  - This extension quickly searches (using ripgrep) your workspace for comment tags like TODO and FIXME, and displays them in a tree view in the activity bar. The view can be dragged out of the activity bar into the explorer pane (or anywhere else you would prefer it to be).

#### Content of projects.json File for Project Manager

- To configure your settings, click on the `Project Manager: Edit Projects` (its like a pen) and arrange the below codes according to circumtances.

```BASH
[
  {
    "name": "01.computerNotes",
    "rootPath": "/home/osman/source/computerNotes",
    "tags": [],
    "enabled": true
  },
  {
      "name": "02.PHP-Egitimi",
      "rootPath": "/home/osman/source/PHP-Egitimi",
      "tags": [],
      "enabled": true
  },
  {
    "name": "03.php_mysql_notlari",
    "rootPath": "/var/www/html/php_mysql_notlari",
    "tags": [],
    "enabled": true
  },
  {
    "name": "04.html",
    "rootPath": "/var/www/html",
    "tags": [],
    "enabled": true
  },
  {
    "name": "05.vue3",
    "rootPath": "/var/www/html/vue3",
    "tags": [],
    "enabled": true
  }
]
```

- To dictate where project manager should be loking for your git projects, click on `Open Settings` and type `projectManager.git.basefolders`.
- Type the paths you have and press `Add Item`.
