# Dual Boot Ubuntu 22.04.1 LTS and Windows 10

## Thigs To Do in Windows

- [Download Ubuntu 22.04.1 LTS](https://ubuntu.com/download/desktop/thank-you?version=22.04.1&architecture=amd64)
- [Download Rufus](https://github.com/pbatard/rufus/releases/download/v3.20/rufus-3.20.exe)
- Run Rufus and select the device you want to boot.
- Select uploaded ubuntu version after finding it under the name of `Boot selection`.
- Select `Partition scheme` as `GPT`.
- Click on `START`.
- After the process is done, power of the machine.

## Things To do in USB

- While starting the computer, press `F7`(It may subject to change according to your computer and operating system) and select your USB as boot device.
- After that, Ubuntu will be opened in your computer.
- Click on `Install Ubuntu` button.
- Choose `Keyboard layout` as you wish and `Continue`.
- Choose only `Normal installation` and `Install third-party software fr graphics and Wi-Fi hardware and additional media formats` and `Continue`. (most suitable)
- Choose `Something else` as installation type and `Continue`.
- Choose SSD to setup Linux and choose mount point as `\` and click on `Install Now`.
- Click on `Continue` in the pop-up window.
- Fulfill the `Where are you?` and `Who are you?` parts and `Continue`.
- After installation is done, click on `Restart Now`.
- Remove the installation medium and press `ENTER` while starting computer.
- Choose `Ubuntu`.

**NOTE:** While starting the machine, press `F7`(It may subject to change according to your computer and operating system) and select whichever the system you want to use. That's all.
