# Setup Necessary Features on Linux

## System Update Installation

- Below commands are used to make the system up to date. Both commands should be run before installing any app.

```BASH
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade -y
```

## Set System Time

```BASH
# to set timezone as Istanbul
sudo timedatectl set-timezone Europe/Istanbul

# to choose timezone manually: sudo dpkg-reconfigure tzdata

# to setup auxiliary packages
sudo apt-get install ntp ntpdate -y

# to setup NTP server
sudo ntpdate ntp.ubuntu.com

# to get timezone and current time
timedatectl status
```

## Check Drivers

```BASH
sudo ubuntu-drivers autoinstall
```

## Desktop Configurations

```BASH
gsettings set org.gnome.shell.extensions.dash-to-dock dock-position 'LEFT'            # to set the position of the dock to the left
gsettings set org.gnome.shell.extensions.dash-to-dock click-action 'minimize'         # to minimize/extend all windows of a folder/program with one click
gsettings set org.gnome.shell.extensions.dash-to-dock scroll-action 'cycle-windows'   # to switch between windows of a folder/program with mouse rolling
```

**NOTE:** To see more configurations about dock [visit](https://github.com/micheleg/dash-to-dock/blob/master/schemas/org.gnome.shell.extensions.dash-to-dock.gschema.xml)

## Guake

- Guake is a dropdown terminal made for the GNOME desktop environment.

```BASH
sudo apt-get install guake -y
```

#### Guake Configurations

- In start menu type `Guake` and press <kbd>ENTER</kbd> to launch Guake Preferences.
- In `General` fulfill the checkbox for `Start Guake at login`.
- In `Main Window` fulfill the checkbox for `Place tabs on top`.

## Necessary Packages

- **Vim** is a free and open-source, screen-based text editor program.
- **Bat**, which is a cat command written in Rust programming language, comes with syntax highlighting, git integration, and works as is a drop-in cat command replacement.
- **xclip** is X11 clipboard manipulation tool, similar to xsel.Handles the X primary and secondary selections, plus the system clipboard ( <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd> / <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>V</kbd> ).
- **Axel** is a program that downloads a file from a FTP or HTTP server through multiple connection, each connection downloads its own part of the file.
- **Gnome Tweak Tool** is software that allows us to change the general appearance and behavior of components in the Gnome Desktop Environment.
- **Net-tools** package is a collection of programs for controlling the network subsystem of the Linux kernel. This package is known to build and work properly using an LFS-10.1 platform.
- **HardInfo** (in short for “hardware information“) is a system profiler and benchmark graphical tool for Linux systems, that is able to gather information from both hardware and some software and organize it in an easy to use GUI tool.
- **gpustat** is a GPU monitoring tool, capable of displaying a multitude of information from multiple GPU nodes on one page.
- **nvtop** is a ncurses-based GPU status viewer for NVIDIA GPUs.
- **Caffeine** prevents the desktop from becoming idle when an application is running full-screen. A desktop indicator ‘caffeine-indicator’ supplies a manual toggle, and the command ‘caffeinate’ can be used to prevent idleness for the duration of any command.
- **Wormhole** lets you share files with end-to-end encryption and a link that automatically expires. So you can keep what you share private and make sure your stuff doesn't stay online forever.

```BASH
sudo apt install vim bat xclip axel gnome-tweaks net-tools hardinfo gpustat nvtop caffeine magic-wormhole -y
```

- `batcat $fileName` # to see and arrange the content of any file.
- `xclip -sel clip` # to copy
- `xclip -sel clip -o` # to paste
- `gpustat -i 0.20` # to follow GPU usage as 5 measurements / second (or 1 measurement / milisecond)
- `wormhole send "fileName"` # to send file

## TLDR

- **TLDR** is an internet slang for a summary of a long text. Its name comes from the acronym (or initialism) TL;DR, which stands for too long; didn't read. In the same spirit, the tldr command-line tool summarizes a lengthy man page and consists mainly of examples.

```BASH
sudo apt install tldr -y
tldr -u
```

- `tldr $commandName` # to get short summary manual of any command.

## GNOME Sushi

- It is a file previewer. To use it hit Space Bar on keyboard to quick preview selected file in a pop-up window. And, hit the Space Bar again will close it.

```BASH
sudo apt install gnome-sushi -y
```

## GNOME Screenshot

- GNOME Screenshot is a desktop environment-agnostic utility for taking screenshots. When you bind any key to gnome-screenshot, you can use this key combination to take screenshot.

```BASH
sudo apt install gnome-screenshot -y
sudo apt install xclip -y
```

- Then go to `Settings | Keyboard Shortcuts | View and Customize Shortcuts | Custom Shortcuts`
- And create a new shortcut by clicking on `+` symbol
- Give it a `Name` and paste the following command into `Command`.

`sh -c 'gnome-screenshot -af /home/$USER/Pictures/$(date "+%Y.%m.%d-%H.%M.%S").png'`

- Click on `Set Shortcut...` and give it a key combination (in my case <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>SHIFT</kbd> + <kbd>S</kbd> ).
- Then click on `Add`.

**NOTE:** If you face some problems to save the screenshot into selected location (in my case it is Pictures folder), try to change permissions with the following command.

`sudo chmod ugo+rwx /home/$USER/Pictures/*`

- To revert the changes you've done, use the following.u kodu kullanabilirsiniz.

`sudo chmod ugo-rwx /home/$USER/Pictures/*`

## Firefox

- Mozilla Firefox, or simply Firefox, is a free and open-source web browser developed by the Mozilla Foundation and its subsidiary, the Mozilla Corporation. It uses the Gecko rendering engine to display web pages, which implements current and anticipated web standards.

```BASH
sudo apt install firefox -y
```

**NOTE:** When the snap update warning appears, all applications are closed and the following command is run.

```BASH
sudo snap refresh
```

- If the snap type installation were done and you want to change it to the apt type, use the following series of commands.

```BASH
sudo add-apt-repository -y ppa:mozillateam/ppa
```

```BASH
# Below commands should be copied and pasted as one piece
echo '
Package: *
Pin: release o=LP-PPA-mozillateam
Pin-Priority: 1001

Package: firefox
Pin: version 1:1snap1-0ubuntu2
Pin-Priority: -1
' | sudo tee /etc/apt/preferences.d/mozilla-firefox
```

```BASH
sudo snap remove firefox

sudo apt install firefox -y

echo 'Unattended-Upgrade::Allowed-Origins:: "LP-PPA-mozillateam:${distro_codename}";' | sudo tee /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/51unattended-upgrades-firefox
```

## Visual Studio Code

- Visual Studio Code, also commonly referred to as VSCode, is a source-code editor made by Microsoft with the Electron Framework, for Windows, Linux and macOS. Features include support for debugging, syntax highlighting, intelligent code completion, snippets, code refactoring, and embedded Git.

```BASH
sudo apt install software-properties-common apt-transport-https wget -y
wget -O- https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc | sudo gpg --dearmor | sudo tee /usr/share/keyrings/vscode.gpg
echo deb [arch=amd64 signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/vscode.gpg] https://packages.microsoft.com/repos/vscode stable main | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/vscode.list
sudo apt install code -y
```

**Ref:** https://linuxhint.com/install-visual-studio-code-ubuntu22-04/

#### Update VSCode

- Install the latest version of [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/).
- Then use the following command.

`sudo apt install ~/Downloads/$FILE` # default download directory choosen as ~/Downloads

#### Completely Remove VSCode

```BASH
sudo apt purge code
sudo apt autoremove
rm-rf /home/$USER/.vscode/
rm -rf /home/$USER/.config/Code/
```

## Git

- Git is a distributed version control system developed by Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux Kernel.

```BASH
sudo apt-get install git -y
git config --global user.email "osmankayi06@gmail.com"
git config --global user.name "OsmanKAYI"
```

#### GitHub Configurations

```BASH
cd ~/.ssh
ssh-keygen -o -t rsa -C "osmankayi06@gmail.com"
# Public name will be saved as osmankayi instead of id_rsa
ssh-add ~/.ssh/osmankayi
```

- -o flag forces the tool to generate SSH keys with the OpenSSH format
- -t flag specifies they type of SSH keys to create
- -C flag allows for comments that get added as metadata at the end of the public key

`cat osmankayi.pub`

- Copy the Github SSh key starting with "sss-rsa" and ending with ".com".
- After that go to "Settings > SSH and GPG keys > New SSH key".
- Give it a unique name and paste the copied Github ssh key here.

## Apache

- Apache is the most commonly used Web server on Linux systems. Web servers are used to serve Web pages requested by client computers.

```BASH
sudo apt install apache2 apache2-utils -y
sudo rm -f /var/www/html/index.html
sudo systemctl enable apache2
sudo service apache2 restart
```

#### Apache Configurations

```BASH
sudo adduser $USER www-data
sudo chown -R $USER:www-data /var/www/html/
```

## PHP

- PHP is a general-purpose scripting language geared toward web development.

```BASH
sudo apt install php7.4-fpm php7.4-intl php7.4-imagick php7.4-dev php7.4-zip php7.4-curl php7.4-xmlrpc php7.4-sqlite3 php7.4-gd php7.4-mysql php7.4-mbstring php7.4-xml libapache2-mod-php7.4 -y
sudo service apache2 restart
```

**NOTE:** Two different verisons of php can be used with following the instructions [here](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/computerNotes/blob/master/database.webDesign/php/00.how.to.use.two.different.php.versions.md)

**NOTE:** The max uploaded file size can be increased from [here](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/computerNotes/blob/master/database.webDesign/db/mysql/00.increase.max.upload.file.size.md)

### Xdebug

- Xdebug is a PHP extension which provides debugging and profiling capabilities. It uses the DBGp debugging protocol.

```BASH
sudo find /usr/ -name xdebug.so
sudo apt-get purge php7.4-xdebug
sudo apt-get install php7.4-xdebug
sudo vi /etc/php/7.4/apache2/conf.d/20-xdebug.ini
# add following 3 lines in 20-xdebug.ini
```

```
zend_extension=xdebug.so
xdebug.mode=develop,debug
xdebug.start_with_request=yes
```

```BASH
sudo systemctl restart apache2
```

**NOTE:** Configure [Xdebug](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/computerNotes/blob/master/database.webDesign/php/09.xdebug.md)

### Composer

- Composer is a dependency manager made for the PHP programming language. It allows users to easily manage and integrate external dependencies and libraries for PHP software development.

```BASH
sudo apt install composer -y
```

#### How To Watch Errors Real-time

```BASH
sudo tail -f /var/log/apache2/error.log
```

## MariaDB

- MariaDB is a community-developed, commercially supported fork of the MySQL relational database management system, intended to remain free and open-source software under the GNU General Public License.

```BASH
sudo apt install mariadb-server mariadb-client -y
sudo systemctl enable mariadb
sudo service mariadb restart
sudo mysql -u root
  show databases;
  use mysql;
  update user set plugin='' where User='root';
  flush privileges;
  exit;
sudo mysql_secure_installation
```

#### MySQL Password Reset

- Below commands can be used just in the first experience since after the first usage, password will not be emty ("").

```BASH
sudo service mysql  stop
sudo service mysqld stop
sudo mysqld_safe --skip-grant-tables --skip-networking &
mysql -u root
  use mysql;
  update user set password=PASSWORD("root") where User='root';
  flush privileges;
  quit;
sudo kill `sudo cat /var/run/mysqld/mysqld.pid`
sudo service mysql  start
sudo service mysqld start
```

- or simply

```BASH
mysql --user="root" --password="" --execute="SET PASSWORD FOR 'root'@'localhost' = PASSWORD('root');"
```

#### MariaDB Password Reset

```BASH
sudo service mariadb  stop
sudo mysqld_safe --skip-grant-tables --skip-networking --skip-networking &
mysql -u root
  use mysql;
  update user set password=PASSWORD("root") where User='root';
  flush privileges;
  quit;
sudo kill `sudo cat /var/run/mysqld/mysqld.pid`
sudo service mariadb start
```

## Redis

- Redis is an in-memory data structure store, used as a distributed, in-memory key–value database, cache and message broker, with optional durability.

```BASH
sudo apt install redis-server php-redis -y
systemctl enable redis-server
systemctl start redis-server
```

#### Start Redis With Password

```BASH
sudo vim /etc/redis/redis.conf
```

- Find and uncomment `requirepass yourpassword` and write your password in "yourpassword" part

#### Change Redis Password

```BASH
redis-cli
AUTH oldpassword #if exists
CONFIG SET requirepass "newpassword"
CONFIG REWRITE
```

## Restart Services

- Almost every change needs a restart to be activated.

```BASH
sudo service apache2 restart
sudo service mariadb restart
sudo systemctl enable mariadb
sudo systemctl enable apache2
```

## html Configurations

- The HyperText Markup Language or HTML is the standard markup language for documents designed to be displayed in a web browser.

```BASH
sudo adduser $USER www-data
sudo chown -R $USER:www-data /var/www/html/
cd ~
cd ~/Desktop
ln -s /var/www/html/
sudo rm -f /var/www/html/index.html
```

## Adminer

- Adminer is a tool for managing content in databases. It natively supports MySQL, MariaDB, PostgreSQL, SQLite, MS SQL, Oracle, Elasticsearch and MongoDB. Adminer is distributed under Apache license in a form of a single PHP file.

```BASH
cd /var/www/html
mkdir adminer
cd adminer
wget -O index.php https://www.adminer.org/latest.php
```

## Vue

- [Vue.js](https://vuejs.org/) is an open-source model–view–viewmodel front end JavaScript framework for building user interfaces and single-page applications. It was created by Evan You.

```BASH
npm init vue@latest  # choose a $projectname, after that, choose `No` unless you know what you are doing
```

```BASH
cd $projectname
npm install          # project setup
npm run dev          # compile and hot-reload for development
```

- When the project is ready to publish, run the following to have the last product.

```BASH
npm run build  # compile and minify for production
```

**NOTE:** If you face with some problems in `npm init vue@latest`, which is generally because of node version installed in machine, run the following.

```BASH
sudo npm cache clean -f
sudo npm install -g n
sudo n stable
```

**NOTE:** If you see a warning about `spoof.js`, it can be beacuse of one of the firefox extensions (ex: `Mobile simulator`).

## Anaconda

- Anaconda is a distribution of the Python and R programming languages for scientific computing, that aims to simplify package management and deployment.

- Checkout the latest version from [download page](https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/) and run the following command.

  ```BASH
  curl --output anaconda.sh https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2022.05-Linux-x86_64.sh
  bash anaconda.sh
  ```

- Press <kbd>ENTER</kbd> until the yes/no question comes.
- Then type `yes` to accept the Anaconda licence aggrement to continue.
- Verify the directory location for Anaconda installation. Just hit <kbd>ENTER</kbd> to continue installer to that directory.
- Type “yes” to initialize the Anaconda installer on your system.

  ```BASH
  source ~/.bashrc  # to activate the installation
  conda --version # to check the installed version
  ```

- Now we are in the default base of the programming environment. To verify the installation we will open conda list.
  `conda list`
  `conda update --all -y` # to upgrade the Anaconda on your system
  `conda deactivate` # to exit from conda terminal

#### Jupyter Notebook

- Project Jupyter is a project to develop open-source software, open standards, and services for interactive computing across multiple programming languages.
- `jupyter notebook` # to start jupyter notebook while you are in the conda terminal

#### Completely Remove Anaconda

```BASH
rm -rf ~/anaconda3 ~/.conda
vim ~/.bashrc # to edit the ~/.bashrc file
```

- Navigate to the end of the file and remove the Anaconda environment configuration.
- Press <kbd>ESC</kbd> and type `:wq` and then press <kbd>ENTER</kbd> to save file.

## OpenSSH

- OpenSSH is a suite of secure networking utilities based on the Secure Shell protocol, which provides a secure channel over an unsecured network in a client–server architecture.

```BASH
sudo apt-get install openssh-server -y
sudo systemctl enable ssh
sudo systemctl start ssh
```

#### Copy SSH Public Key To Remote Server

```BASH
ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/id_rsa user@server
```

#### How To Copy Files Within SSH Servers

```BASH
scp -r user@server:/file/to/path ./local/path/to/copy
```

#### Securely Stop SSH Server

```BASH
sudo service sshd stop
sudo systemctl disable sshd
```

## VirtualBox

- VirtualBox is a general purpose virtualiser that is available across Linux, Mac OS and Windows.

```BASH
sudo apt install virtualbox -y
```

### VirtualBox Full-Screen Configurations

```BASH
sudo apt update
sudo apt install build-essential dkms linux-headers-$(uname -r) -y
cd
cd /media/$USER/VBox_GAs_6.1.381
./autorun.sh
reboot
```

## VLC Media Player

- VLC media player is a free and open-source, portable, cross-platform media player software and streaming media server developed by the VideoLAN project.

```BASH
sudo apt install vlc -y
```

## Anydesk

- AnyDesk is a remote desktop application distributed by AnyDesk Software GmbH. The proprietary software program provides platform independent remote access to personal computers and other devices running the host application. It offers remote control, file transfer, and VPN functionality.

```BASH
wget -qO - https://keys.anydesk.com/repos/DEB-GPG-KEY | sudo apt-key add -
echo "deb http://deb.anydesk.com/ all main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/anydesk-stable.list
sudo apt install anydesk -y
```

**NOTE:** If the screen share is not working, use following commands.

```BASH
echo $XDG_SESSION_TYPE
sudo nano /etc/gdm3/custom.conf
# uncomment this line   ===>    WaylandEnable=false
# and reboot your system
```

## Discord

- Discord is a VoIP and instant messaging social platform. Users have the ability to communicate with voice calls, video calls, text messaging, media and files in private chats or as part of communities called "servers".

  - Download the DEB installer from [Discord](https://discord.com/download)
  - Open the dowload location in Terminal and type the following command.<br>
    `sudo dpkg -i discord-0.0.22.deb`

## Zoom

- Zoom, stylized as zoom or Zoom Meetings is a proprietary videotelephony software program developed by Zoom Video Communications.

  - Download the DEB installer from [Zoom](https://zoom.us/download?os=linux)
  - Open the dowload location in Terminal and type the following command.<br>
    `sudo apt install ./zoom_amd64.deb`

#### WakaTime for VS Code

- It is an open source plugin for productivity metrics, goals, leaderboards, and automatic time tracking.

1. Press <kbd>F1</kbd> and type `install`. Pick `Extensions: Install Extension`
2. Type `wakatime` and hit <kbd>ENTER</kbd>.
3. Install WakaTime.
4. Enter your [API Key](https://wakatime.com/settings/api-key).
5. Use VS Code like you normally do and your coding activity will be displayed on your [WakaTime Dashboard](https://wakatime.com/dashboard).

**NOTE:** Other useful VSCode extensions and related setting.json file can be found from [here](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/computerNotes/blob/master/09.vscode.extensions.md)

## Sweet Home 3D

- Sweet Home 3D is a free architectural design software that helps users create a 2D plan of a house, with a 3D preview, and decorate exterior and interior views, including ability to place furniture and home appliances. In Sweet Home 3D, furniture can be imported and arranged to create a virtual environment.

```BASH
sudo apt install flatpak -y
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists flathub https://flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
flatpak install flathub com.sweethome3d.Sweethome3d -y
flatpak update com.sweethome3d.Sweethome3d
sudo apt install sweethome3d -y
```
