# What is LVM?

LVM (Logical Volume Manager) is a disk management system used in Linux systems. LVM partitions the physical partitions on disks into logical units, making these units more flexible and manageable. This way, partitions on disks can be further improved by adding more features.

Using LVM, you can combine different disks into a single logical unit, creating a larger storage space. Additionally, you can increase, resize or remove the size of logical units.

While making disk management more flexible and manageable, LVM performs a backup process to prevent data loss on disks during the partitioning process. This way, you can safely store and manage your data.

## Example of Using LVM for 3x500GB Disks

For example, you can create a single logical unit using LVM for 3 500GB disks. You can follow the steps below:

- Identify your disks in the system. You can use the `sudo fdisk -l` command for this.
- Convert your disks into physical units. You can do this using the `sudo pvcreate /dev/sda /dev/sdb /dev/sdc` command. Here, **/dev/sda**, **/dev/sdb** and **/dev/sdc** represent your disks.
- Combine the physical units. You can do this using the `sudo vgcreate myvg /dev/sda /dev/sdb /dev/sdc` command. **myvg** represents the name of the unit you have created.
- Create a logical unit. You can do this using the `sudo lvcreate -l 100%VG -n mylv myvg` command. Here, **mylv** represents the name of the logical unit you have created.
- Format the logical unit. You can do this using the `sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/myvg/mylv` command. Here, **ext4** represents the file system type.
- Mount the logical unit to the system. To do this, create a directory and mount the logical unit to this directory. For example, you can create a directory named **mydata** using the `sudo mkdir /mnt/mydata` command and mount the logical unit to this directory using the `sudo mount /dev/myvg/mylv /mnt/mydata` command.

After completing these steps, you will have created a single logical unit consisting of 3 500GB disks. You can store and manage your files on this unit.

#### Commands Required for This Process:

```BASH
sudo fdisk -l # Identifying disks
sudo pvcreate /dev/sda /dev/sdb /dev/sdc   # Creating physical units
sudo vgcreate myvg /dev/sda /dev/sdb /dev/sdc    # Combining physical units
sudo lvcreate -l 100%VG -n mylv myvg    # Creating a logical unit
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/myvg/mylv    # Formatting the logical unit
sudo mkdir /mnt/mydata    # Creating a directory
sudo mount /dev/myvg/mylv /mnt/mydata    # Mounting the logical unit to the system
```
