# Forensic Data Recovery Programs for Linux

Linux için adli veri kurtarma yazılımlarından bazıları şunlardır:

- **TestDisk:** is a free and open-source data recovery software used to recover lost or damaged partitions and prevent data loss.
- **PhotoRec:** is an open-source data recovery software used to recover lost or damaged partitions. It can recover various file types such as photos, videos, documents, and archive files.
- **Foremost:** is a data recovery software used to recover files in a specific format. It is particularly effective for recovering media files such as images, videos, and audio files.
- **Scalpel:** is a data recovery tool used to recover files and documents. Scalpel is used to recover files in a specific format based on the file type.
- **Sleuth Kit:** is a toolset used for data recovery and digital forensic investigation. Sleuth Kit is used to analyze file systems and recover lost or damaged files. https://www.sleuthkit.org/.
- **Extundelete:** is a free tool used to recover deleted files in Linux file systems (especially ext3 and ext4).
- **ddrescue:** is a free and open-source data recovery tool for the Linux operating system. This tool is used to recover data from damaged or corrupted disks.

### Detailed Information for TestDisk

- TestDisk is an open-source data recovery software that is used to recover lost or damaged partitions and designed to recover data without damaging your disks. TestDisk supports many operating systems and file systems.
- In addition to physical disks, TestDisk can also scan USB drives, memory cards, and other storage devices. It also supports many types of file systems, including NTFS, FAT, ext2/ext3/ext4, HFS+, and many more. TestDisk independently accesses file types not related to your disk and recovers data.
- TestDisk has an easy-to-use interface. Users select the disk or disk image from which data will be recovered and give instructions to TestDisk to start the data recovery process. TestDisk scans for lost or damaged partitions and offers options for recovering data.
- TestDisk offers many different data recovery options, including file system restructuring, recovery of partition information, repair of damaged boot sectors, and recovery of lost files.
- TestDisk can also specify the output directory where the saved files will be stored. Additionally, TestDisk has several different levels, with higher levels offering more data recovery options.
- TestDisk is a free open-source tool. A tool called PhotoRec is also included with TestDisk. PhotoRec is used to recover data from disks.
- However, the use of TestDisk may require some technical knowledge and there may be many options, so it can be a bit complex for beginner-level users.

### Detailed Information for PhotoRec

- PhotoRec is an open-source data recovery software used to recover data from disk images or physical disks. It can recover many file types including photos, videos, and documents.
- PhotoRec performs data recovery in a file system-independent way, which allows it to be suitable for many different file system types. Additionally, PhotoRec uses a signature-based approach to scan data blocks on disks, allowing it to recover data regardless of the file system.
- PhotoRec has a user-friendly interface. Users select the disk or disk image from which data will be recovered and instruct PhotoRec to start the recovery process. PhotoRec scans each data block and recovers the data when it finds a file signature.
- PhotoRec allows users to select the types of files to be recovered, meaning users can determine the types of files to be recovered. PhotoRec can also specify the output directory where the recovered files will be saved.
- PhotoRec is available for various operating systems including Windows, macOS, Linux, and many others. PhotoRec also offers various language options, allowing users to use it in their preferred language.
- PhotoRec is a free open-source tool. Additionally, TestDisk, a tool for recovering damaged or lost partitions, is also included with PhotoRec.
- However, using PhotoRec may require some technical knowledge and there may be many options, so it may be a bit complex for novice users.

### Detailed Information for Foremost

- Foremost is an open-source data recovery tool primarily designed for Unix and Unix-like operating systems. It is used for recovering files from disk images or physical disks.
- Foremost uses a signature-based approach to recover files. It employs a set of distinct signatures to identify files based on their file types. For instance, it includes signatures for JPEG, PNG, PDF, HTML, and other specific file types.
- Foremost uses a signature file for each file type. These signature files contain signatures that determine the beginning and end of files. Using these signatures, Foremost can recover files in a particular format.
- Foremost automates the file recovery process and lists the recovered files in a specific format, making it easier for users to locate the files they need. It also offers several features, such as working on disk images and supporting multiple file system types.
- Foremost is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) and is available for free. It has several customizable settings to cater to users' needs. For example, Foremost allows you to specify the output directory for recovered files. Additionally, you can customize features like the size and number of recovered files.
- Foremost is supported by various package managers and storage tools for Unix and Unix-like operating systems, making it easy to download pre-compiled versions of the tool.
- Foremost is easy to use, even for those with basic understanding. Being an open-source tool, Foremost can be customized and reused by developers.

### Detailed Information for Scalpel

- Scalpel is an open-source data recovery tool that can be used on Unix and Unix-like operating systems. It is a tool used for file recovery and is used to recover files in a certain format depending on the file type. For example, it can recover JPEG, PNG, PDF, HTML, and other specific file types.
- Scalpel is used to recover lost files on disk images or physical disks. In order to recover files, the signatures used by Scalpel can determine the beginning and end of files. Scalpel can recover files in a specific format using these signatures.
- Scalpel is an open-source tool and is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL). This means that Scalpel can be used for free. There is a pre-compiled version of Scalpel available for Unix and Unix-like operating systems, and the source code is also available.
- Scalpel recovers files using file signatures. There are many file signatures available for Scalpel to use, and it is easy to configure Scalpel. File signatures can be tailored specifically to the disk partition or disk image on which Scalpel is run.
- Scalpel has several different settings and can be customized to meet the needs of the user. For example, Scalpel allows you to specify an output directory for recovered files. Additionally, features such as the size and number of files to be recovered can be customized.
- Scalpel automates the data recovery process and sorts recovered files in a specific format. This helps users find recovered files more easily. The use of Scalpel is easy for anyone with a basic understanding.

### Detailed Information for Sleuth Kit

- Sleuth Kit is an open-source toolset for digital forensics and data recovery. It is used to analyze file systems, recover lost or damaged files, and examine data. It can also work with disk images and integrate with other tools used in digital forensics investigations.
- Sleuth Kit runs on Unix and Unix-like operating systems and can analyze file systems, disk partitions, files and directories, file permissions, timestamps, and other file attributes. It supports many file systems, including popular ones like FAT, NTFS, Ext2/3/4, HFS+, and UFS.
- Sleuth Kit consists of several different tools, including Autopsy, The Sleuth Kit Framework (TSK), mactime, fiwalk, ils, icat, istat, ffind, fls, fsstat, and hfind. Autopsy provides a graphical user interface and makes it easier to use Sleuth Kit tools.
- While analyzing file systems, Sleuth Kit can also access the contents of files. This includes features like file content examination, keyword search, file extraction, and image analysis.
- Sleuth Kit can be used in conjunction with many other open-source tools used in digital forensics investigations. For example, Sleuth Kit and Autopsy can be used together to handle many digital forensics scenarios.
- As an open-source project, Sleuth Kit is continuously developed and updated by the community. It is also used by digital forensics experts and security researchers.

### Detailed Information for extundelete

- extundelete is a free tool used to recover deleted files in Linux file systems, especially in ext3 and ext4. It searches for the data of deleted files on the disk and tries to recover them using the original file names and file path.
- extundelete is a command-line based tool and can be used in ext3 and ext4 file systems supported by the Linux kernel. extundelete can also backup the file system before the file is deleted and perform the recovery process using the backup.
- extundelete has a user-friendly interface. Users select the disk partition they want to recover deleted files from and the target directory for the recovered files, and then instruct extundelete to start the recovery process.
- However, extundelete only searches for and attempts to recover deleted file data on the disk. It may not be possible to recover overwritten or rewritten files. Additionally, extundelete only works in ext3 and ext4 file systems and is not suitable for other file systems.
- In conclusion, extundelete is an effective tool for recovering deleted files in Linux file systems, but if the data was not backed up before the file was deleted or has been overwritten, it may not be possible to recover it.

### Detailed Information for ddrescue

- ddrescue is a free and open-source data recovery tool for the Linux operating system. This tool is used to recover data from damaged or corrupted disks.
- ddrescue is a resilient data recovery tool against read errors on disks. Unlike other similar tools, it detects read errors on the disk during the data recovery process and skips these faulty sections, then goes back and tries again to complete the data recovery process.
- ddrescue offers various options for users to recover data from corrupted disks and allows users to skip or prioritize certain sections during the data recovery process. Additionally, ddrescue also has the option to create a disk image and perform data recovery on that image.
- ddrescue is designed specifically for Linux systems but is also available for other operating systems. ddrescue helps users protect data on the disk during the data recovery process and minimize data loss.

## Save Deleted Files in Ubuntu

**Ref:** https://askubuntu.com/questions/3883/how-to-recover-deleted-files

**What can I do to recover deleted files from my USB drive?**

To recover your deleted files, you can follow these steps:

- Stop using the USB drive immediately and do not perform any actions on it. If you write new data on it, you may overwrite the deleted files, making the recovery process more difficult.
- Install file recovery software on Ubuntu. You can use free tools like "testdisk" or "photorec" for this purpose. These tools are usually available in the Ubuntu package manager, so you can install them by using the following command in the terminal: `sudo apt install testdisk`
- Reconnect the USB drive and run testdisk or photorec. These tools will scan the USB drive for deleted files and show recoverable files.
- Select the files to be recovered and start the recovery process. The recovery of files may take a few minutes or hours, so be patient.
- Store the recovered files in a different location as saving them back to the same USB drive may risk deleting the previously lost files.

It is possible to recover your files using this method. However, it should be noted that some files may not be recoverable, or the recovered files may be corrupted. Additionally, the importance of backing up data on USB drives has been emphasized once again.

**What programs can be used to recover deleted files on Ubuntu?**

There are several different programs available to recover deleted files on Ubuntu. Some of these programs are listed below:

- [TestDisk](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/osmankayi.com/blob/main/linux/20.data.recovery.md#detailed-information-for-testdisk) -- [Documentation](https://www.cgsecurity.org/wiki/TestDisk)
- [PhotoRec](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/osmankayi.com/blob/main/linux/20.data.recovery.md#detailed-information-for-photorec) -- [Documentation](https://www.cgsecurity.org/wiki/PhotoRec)
- [Scalpel](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/osmankayi.com/blob/main/linux/20.data.recovery.md#detailed-information-for-scalpel)
- [Foremost](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/osmankayi.com/blob/main/linux/20.data.recovery.md#detailed-information-for-foremost)
- [extundelete](https://github.com/OsmanKAYI/osmankayi.com/blob/main/linux/20.data.recovery.md#detailed-information-for-extundelete)

Among these programs, TestDisk and PhotoRec are the most popular. Besides these, Ubuntu may have other file recovery tools that you can use. However, an important point to remember is that deleted files should not be overwritten. If overwritten, recovering deleted files may become much more difficult or unrecoverable.

### TestDisk & PhotoRec

```BASH
# testdisk package contains PhotoRec and TestDisk packages
sudo apt install testdisk
```

### Foremost

I have used foremost to recover damaged hard disk both under NTFS (windows), FAT32 (Flashcard from a Nokia phone), and ext3 with great results. Command-line only, but quite it's easy, something like this:

```BASH
# Installing the package
sudo apt install foremost

# Recover all deleted files in the specified .img file
foremost img_file.img

# Recover a disk with everything inside of it
sudo foremost -i /dev/sda -o /path/to/output/diretory/directoryname

# Recovering deleted mp4 and jpg files in the specified .img file
foremost -i img_file.img -t mp4,jpg  -o /path/to/output/diretory/directoryname

# Recovering deleted png, mp4 and pdf files in a disk
sudo foremost -v -t png,mp4,pdf -i /dev/sda1  -o /path/to/output/diretory/directoryname -T
```

**Refs:**

- https://github.com/jonstewart/foremost
- https://linuxconfig.org/how-to-recover-deleted-files-with-foremost-on-linux
- https://www.section.io/engineering-education/recover-deleted-files-with-foremost/

### Scalpel

- **Type Signatures:** https://gist.github.com/cfgnunes/134c0e9bf6553fad62770f82a3c1e652

```BASH
# create the .IMG file of the USB content that we will recover
sudo dd if=/dev/sdb of=~/image.img status=progress

# install the Scalpel package
sudo apt install scalpel

# open the Scalpel configuration file
# delete the '#' character at the beginning of the lines for the file types we want to perform recovery on
# save the file and exit
sudo vi /etc/scalpel/scalpel.conf

# recover the desired file types from the .IMG file using the configuration file
# -o is the folder name where the recovered files will be written
scalpel -c /etc/scalpel/scalpel.conf -o /path/to/output/diretory/directoryname /path/to/location/of/image.img
```

##### mp4 Video Recovery Settings for Scalpel (for ~9GB File)

**/etc/scalpel/scalpel.conf** file content:

```
mp4 y 95000000000 # MPEG-4 video files
mp4 y 95000000000 \x00\x00\x00\x18\x66\x74\x79\x70\x69\x73\x6F\x6D # MPEG-4 video files
asf y 95000000000 \x30\x26\xB2\x75\x8E\x66\xCF\x11\xA6\xD9\x00\xAA\x00\x62\xCE\x6C
mpg y 95000000000 \x00\x00\x01\xb3 \x00\x00\x01\xb7
mpg y 95000000000 \x00\x00\x01\xba \x00\x00\x01\xb9
avi y 95000000000 RIFF????AVI\x20LIST
flv y 95000000000 FLV\x01
mp4 y 95000000000 ????ftypM4A
mp4 y 95000000000 ????ftypisom
mp4 y 95000000000 ????ftypmp42
m4v y 95000000000 ????ftypqt
3gp y 95000000000 ????ftyp3gp
```

**Ref:** https://www.linux-magazine.com/Online/Features/Recovering-Deleted-Files-with-Scalpel

##### Repairing the File with ffmpeg

`ffmpeg -i 1.mp4 -c copy $filename.mp4`

##### Codec Changing (Slow)

`ffmpeg -i 1.mp4 -c:v libx264 -c:a aac -strict -2 -b:a 128k -preset slow $filename.mp4`

##### Codec Changing (with GPU acceleration)

`ffmpeg -hwaccel cuda -i 1.mp4 -c:v h264_nvenc -preset fast $filename.mp4`

##### Codec Changing (Fast)

```BASH
# both lines produce the same result file
ffmpeg -i 1.mp4 -c:v libx264 -crf 23 -preset fast $filename.mp4
ffmpeg -i 1.mp4 -c:v libx264 -preset fast $filename2.mp4
```

##### Extracting Photo Frames of Every Second of a Video File into a Separate Directory

```BASH
mkdir videoFrames
ffmpeg -i $filename.mp4 -q:v 1 -vf fps=1 videoFrames/v%04d.jpg
```
